    double-dates--The problem of Rîm-Sin--Method of reconciling
    Elam--Hammurabi's defeat of Rîm-Sin and the annexation of
    state--Sargon and Merodach-baladan--Sennacherib's attempt
    under the Sargonids--The policies of encouragement and
    VII. Brick of Sin-idinnam, King of Larsa, recording the
    IX. Brick of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa, recording building
    Sun-god
    with a votive inscription of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa
    XVIII. Brick of Sin-gashid, King of Erech, recording the
    recording his restoration of the Sun-temple at Sippar
that empire's expansion, and the vacillating policy of the Sargonids
Narâm-Sin, and at a rather later period by Gudea of Lagash,[6] must
to Sargon of Akkad; but that marked the extreme limit of Babylonian
Arabian coast. The fact that two thousand years later Sargon of
we may readily understand the difficulties encountered by Sennacherib
Village of Sinjar.
A: Sargon's quay-wall. B: Older moat-wall. C: Later moat-wall of
It is the work of Sargon of Assyria,[44] who states the object of
upon it."[45] The two walls of Sargon, which he here definitely names
the quay of Sargon,[46] which run from the old bank of the Euphrates
to the Ishtar Gate, precisely the two points mentioned in Sargon's
A: Sargon's quay-wall. B: Older moat-wall. O: Later moat-wall of
quay-walls, which succeeded that of Sargon. The three narrow walls
Sargon's earlier structure. That the less important Nimitti-Bêl is not
in view of Sargon's earlier reference.
mounds to the north of Sinjar village,[50] is approximately in line
excavations. The discovery of Sargon's inscriptions proved that in
precisely the same way as Sargon refers to the Euphrates. The simplest
the Arakhtu that Sennacherib cast the tower on his destruction of the
of Sennacherib, whose name some of them bear upon the underside. This
pavement. Since the temple was within the citadel fortifications, the
that the destruction of Babylon by Sennacherib had been so thorough
by Trelawney Saunders on the basis of the surveys made between 1860 and
Sinjar (see Fig. 3, 4), and Weissbach has attempted to use them for
[Footnote 44: It was built by Sargon within the last five years of
in Southern Babylonia now marked by the mounds of Senkera, were
these, Rîm-Sin, a ruler of Elamite extraction, was the contemporary of
capture of Ur and Larsa, proved that Rîm-Sin survived into the reign
Another king of Larsa, Warad-Sin, formerly identified with Rîm-Sin, was
son Sin-idinnam. It was realized that Sin-idinnam, the correspondent to
regarded as having preceded Warad-Sin upon the throne.[7]
years are missing, Sin-idinnam and Sin-iḳisham, have thirteen years
other by the short two-years' reign of Sin-iribam, the absence of the
[Illustration: VII. Brick of Sin-idinnam, King of Larsa, recording the
in its train. We already suspected that Rîm-Sin was a long-lived
the throne. That Rîm-Sin did survive into the reign of Samsu-iluna
of contact. The capture of Nîsin by Rîm-Sin, which is recorded in
assumption that the capture of the city by Rîm-Sin should be regarded
that for the seventeenth year of Sin-muballit, the later in the formula
each of these dates from the capture of Nîsin by Rîm-Sin, and so
Rîm-Sin to be commemorated in the date-formulæ of his chief rival;
since they have a direct bearing on the assumption that Rîm-Sin's
also under Rîm-Sin of Larsa,[18] a fact which definitely proves
instructive. It has long been known that Hammurabi was Rîm-Sin's
must have fallen within that of Rîm-Sin. We may therefore regard it as
certain that Rîm-Sin's conquest of Nîsin, which began a new era for
Rîm-Sin's reign, as King of Larsa, his conquest of Nîsin took place.
of Rîm-Sin's reign, which bear a double-date. In every case the
the scribes in cities under Rîm-Sin's control had been in the habit
been to reckon the number of years Rîm-Sin had been upon the throne.
double-dates was intended to give the year of Rîm-Sin's reign which
towards the close of Rîm-Sin's seventeenth year, it is possible that,
reckoning Rîm-Sin's regnal years. Again assuming that the conquest
took place in Rîm-Sin's seventeenth year, those scribes who counted
in their total the year of Rîm-Sin's accession to the throne, and that
corresponding to the seventeenth year of Rîm-Sin's reign.
Nîsin, as corresponding to the seventeenth year of Rîm-Sin, King of
Larsa. And since the relationship of Rîm-Sin with Hammurabi has been
Rîm-Sin is apparently entered as preceding the thirty-second year
Rîm-Sin survived into Samsu-iluna's reign.[25] an attempt was made to
explain the words as referring to a son of Rîm-Sin and not to that
continue to regard the passage as referring to Rîm-Sin. It was further
same deed of sale, are dated the one by Rîm-Sin, and the other in
disputed by Rîm-Sin and Samsu-iluna. Soon after the first of the deeds
with the chronicle, certainly imply that Rîm-Sin was living at least as
that Rîm-Sin would have been an active political force in Babylonia
long reign of sixty-one years, with which Rîm-Sin is credited, must
writing within two years of the time when, as we have seen, Rîm-Sin was
the survival of Rîm-Sin throughout the period of Hammurabi's rule at
If Rîm-Sin had not been deposed by Hammurabi on his conquest of Larsa,
whole of Rîm-Sin's reign as anterior to Hammurabi's conquest. There
it is perhaps just possible that Sin-idinnam and Sin-iḳîsham may have
without deducting from his total the years of Rîm-Sin's dependent rule.
of Hammurabi and Samsu-iluna in the list after, and not beside, Rîm-Sin
part of Rîm-Sin's reign has been the necessity of reducing the duration
last king of Nîsin, and of Rîm-Sin of Larsa, and also under Hammurabi
and Samsu-iluna of Babylon. Most of the tablets of Rîm-Sin's period are
excessive if the whole of Rîm-Sin's reign of sixty-one years be placed
Rîm-Sin as Babylon's vassal for the last twenty-two years of his rule
Rîm-Sin's life. Several of the figures so obtained suggest that, taken
of the suggested method of interpreting Rîm-Sin's reign in the Larsa
We may thus provisionally place the sixty-first year of Rîm-Sin's rule
by Hammurabi and his father Sin-muballit, which have formed for so long
that both took place before Rîm-Sin's capture of Nîsin,[37] and were
of the Nîsin dynasty. That was brought to an end by Rîm-Sin's victory
sufficiently explained by our assumption that Rîm-Sin was not deposed,
eighty years.[40] Since the period of the First Dynasty was not fixed
[Illustration: X. Brick of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa, recording building
years credited to Rîm-Sin in the newly recovered Larsa List, which is a
that Hammurabi rebuilt E-babbar, the temple of the Sun-god in Larsa,
know from the "Synchronistic History" that Nebuchadnezzar I. was the
In his inscription on the rock at Bavian Sennacherib tells us that
placing his son Warad-Sin upon the throne of Larsa in 2143 B.C. It will
Su-mu-ilum | 16 MU Nu-ur-(ilu)Adad | 7 (?) MU (ilu)Sin-idin-nam
| 2 MU (ilu)Sin-i-ri-ba-am | 6(?) MU(ilu)Sin-i-ki-sha-am | 1 MU
Sili(li)-(ilu)Adad | 12 MU Warad-(ilu)Sin | 61 MU (ilu)Ri-im-(ilu)Sin
10 years Nûr-Adad; 7(?) years Sin-idinnam; 2 years Sin-iribam; 6(?)
years Sin-iḳîsham; 1 year Sili-Adad; 12 years Warad-Sin; 61 years
Rîm-Sin; 12(?) years Hammurabi; 12 years Samsu-iluna, the king; 289 the
before the names of Rîm-Sin and Hammurabi, but not before that of
[Footnote 15: The identification of Rîm-Sin's capture of Nîsin with
that referred to in Sin-muballit's seventeenth year was first suggested
and others. Langdon has recently sought to identify Rîm-Sin's capture
Rîm-Sin the king took the city of Nîsin," etc. It will be seen that
from Rîm-Sin's regnal years. Hut, even if we regard the two signs as
in the chronicle reads: (.........) _zu-na-a_ (m)Rîm-(ilu)Sin ana
(.........) illik(ik), "(.........) ... Rîm-Sin to (.........)
"[.........]zuna, the son of Rîm-Sin, to (.........) marched;" but
List, Rîm-Sin's capture of Nîsin would have taken place two years after
Nîsin era would have begun in Sin-muballit's seventh year.]
than those involved in an acceptance of Rîm-Sin's sixty-one years of
of Rîm-Sin's life, the further difficulty of the interruption of the
Nîsin era by Sin-muballit's and Hammurabi's conquests of the city would
of Rîm-Sin's reign of sixty-one years before Hammurabi's conquest of
given for the duration of the dynasty in Syncellus (ed. Dindorf, p.
in Syncellus, cf. Meyer, "Beiträge zur alten Geschichte (Klio)," III.,
Sargon of Akkad had already marched in their raid to the Mediterranean
The two chief Baalim or "Lords" of Khana were the Sun-god and the
discovered at Mukayyar he commemorates the rebuilding of the Sun-temple
in the reign of Apil-Sin, the grandfather of Hammurabi.[36] The date
were the building of a temple to the goddess Nin-Sinna and another
of whose office he inherited. Since we have references to E-sagila in
in that of the great Sun-god of Sippar; but the city could arrange and
Babylonian tradition as the most notable achievement of Sargon's reign;
Nippur, Ur and Eridu, and so did his son Bûr-Sin II., who succeeded
that Larsa for a time even ousted Nîsin from the hegemony in Sinner.
those of Itêr-pîsha and Ura-imitti, who followed Bûr-Sin on the throne
successors, Zabum and Apil-Sin, occupied themselves with the internal
reservoir.[69] Equally uneventful was the reign of Apil-Sin, for though
It was at the close of Apil-Sin's reign at Babylon that Kudur-Mabuk,
installed his own son Warad-Sin upon the throne. It is a testimony
his successor by Sin-idinnam, Nur-Adad's son.[73] Sin-idinnam, indeed,
them, failed to maintain his level of achievement, and that Sin-magir
his two sons, Warad-Sin and Rîm-Sin, successively upon the throne
Elam, while Babylon is at war in turn with both. That Sin-muballit,
the son of Apil-Sin, did not combine with Nîsin to expel the invader
her weakened in the hope of ultimate success. When Rîm-Sin actually
Hammurabi, Sin-muballit's son, should have emerged victorious, was a
northern foes at any rate boasted their origin.[76] Warad-Sin, on
remained aloof in the north, and Sin-muballit is occupied with cutting
first time.[79] It was only in his fourteenth year, after Warad-Sin had
been succeeded at Larsa by his brother Rîm-Sin, that we have evidence
In that year Sin-muballit records that he slew the army of Ur with the
Rîm-Sin's command. Three years later he transferred his attention from
successor of Sin-magir. On that occasion Sin-muballit commemorates his
In the last year of his reign we find Sin-muballit fighting on the
more vigorous offensive on the part of Hammurabi, Sin-muballit's son
Nîsin was doubtless a menace to the plans of Rîm-Sin at Larsa, and it
of territory to Babylon,[82] the diversion was successful. Rîm-Sin
Rîm-Sin's victory must have been a severe blow to Babylon, and it would
In addition to his capital, Rîm-Sin had inherited from his brother
before. For in more than one of his inscriptions Rîm-Sin refers to
That Rîm-Sin's rule in Sumer was attended by great prosperity
It was not until nearly a generation had passed, after Rîm-Sin's
capturing and annexing Larsa. Rîm-Sin himself appears to have survived
Sin-idinnam, his local representative, give no hint of any divided
rule. We may perhaps assume that Rîm-Sin's subsequent revolt was due to
The defeat of Rîm-Sin, and the annexation of Sumer to Babylon, freed
Sun-worship, followed by the other great cities and shrines of Sumer
among the belongings of a votary of the Sun-god, of which we possess
[Footnote 38: Since the year 1903 the Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft
Abû Habba we have recovered the name of Narâm-Sin, a governor or
those of Iawium's reign, his place is taken by Nannar and Sin under
[Footnote 62: Since Gungunum's death is recorded in a local
date-formula in the Pennsylvania Museum, as Sin-ikisha (cf. "Orient.
we now know that that ruler is to be identified with Sin-iḳîsham,
Sin and Lugal-diri-tugab, and the last two to Nergal; cf. "Letters of
[Footnote 70: The Sumu-dâri and Apil-Sin-khegallum Canals were both cut
E-babbar in Sippar. Apil-Sin devoted special attention to Cuthah, the
the goddess Ishtar and another shrine for the Sun-god.]
[Footnote 73: That Sin-idinnam's assumption of the title was justified
"Babylonische Miscellen," p. 1, pl. 1) Sin-magir bears the title of
Warad-Sin was still King of Larsa, he dedicated a chamber in Ishtar's
temple to Nannar at Ur, Warad-Sin describes himself as "he who carries
[Footnote 79: During the first thirteen years of his reign Sin-muballit
cut three canals, the first named after himself, the Sin-muballit
Dûr-Sin-muballit, Bît-Karkara, and Marad. It is possible, of course,
of Rîm-Sin's capture of Nîsin.]
The other wife, who bore the name Rîm-Sin-Shala-bashtashu, was the
daughter of a certain Sin-magir, and Rîm-Sin himself had a daughter
quotes the information from an inscription of Rîm-Sin-Shala-bashtashu,
Rîm-Sin, who was a priestess, is mentioned on a cylinder of Nabonidus
twenty-three, if we place the whole sixty-one years of Rîm-Sin's
Nîsin would have taken place in Sin-muballit's seventh year. But the
available evidence is strongly in favour of curtailing Rîm-Sin's period
named after his father Dûr-Sin-muballit-abim-walidia. The erection of
Marduk; (4) Ur, and E-gishshirgal (the temple of Sin); (5) Sippar,
Arioch with Warad-Sin, the son of Kudur-Mabuk (_op. cit.,_ pp. xlix.
that Sennacherib himself introduced an innovation when he employed
down to us in which he writes to inform Sin-idinnam, his local governor
temple of the Sun-god at Larsa. The governor of Larsa, the principal
dated to the year of Hammurabi's conquest of Rîm-Sin and his subsequent
E-babbar, the temple of the Sun-god at Sippar, a second at Ur, and
towards its close; the defeat of Nîsin in Sin-muballit's seventeenth
to rest by Hammurabi's victories. Hammurabi's old antagonist, Rîm-Sin
Kassite onslaught by an organized invasion, Rîm-Sin raised a revolt
Rîm-Sin, while he dealt with the invasion of Babylon's home-territory.
southwards, he defeated Rîm-Sin's forces and reoccupied Larsa.[2]
It may be that it was at this time he captured, or burnt, Rîm-Sin
legitimately enjoyed. Since Babylon no longer possessed the central
Sun-god's shrine at Sippar is decorated with solar disks of precious
represented by the names of Sin-gashid, Sin-gamil and An-am. From
interesting of Sin-gashid's records is a votive cone, commemorating
chief articles of commerce during his reign,[26] Sin-gamil was An-am's
neighbourhood of Larsa, with their variant dates by formulæ of Rîm-Sin
revolted." Since the success against Ur and Erech was commemorated in
troubles with Rîm-Sin and the Elamites, but must be taken as implying
[Footnote 6: The latest document from Larsa (Senkera) is dated in his
Sun-god.]
had brightened his land like the Sun-god, and Samsu-ditana recording
for Sargon's invasion of Syria. In the late omen-literature, too, the
the world), and King of Sinner and Akkad. We may see evidence in this
his father. "Since the time my father and thine established friendly
has sent me as a present two manehs of gold. Send now much gold, as
so-called "Synchronistic History" of Assyria and Babylonia,[46] which
Synchronistic History is certainly to be preferred to that of the
famous Stele of Narâm-Sin, Hammurabi's Code of Laws, and an important
"Synchronistic History" that the latter succeeded Marduk-nadin-akhê
great temple of the Sun-god at Sippar,[19] has left us some details of
the submission of Sangar of Carchemish, and marched in triumph through
presence of the Sun-god, who is seated in his temple E-babbar.
may be compared with those of the Sun-god Tablet, as an additional
Sargon's army had secured the capture of Samaria, he was obliged to
Sargon and the Assyrian army before its walls. Merodach-baladan was
After the defeat of Shabaka and the Egyptians at Raphia, Sargon was
their appearance from the north and east. In fact, Sargon's conquest of
Sargon was able to turn his attention once more to Babylon, from
On Sargon's death in 705 B.C. the subject provinces of the empire
confederation of the states of Southern Syria. Sennacherib was first
brought Sennacherib again into the country, who, after defeating the
he ruled for little more than a year, being defeated by Sennacherib
Assyrian army from Nagitu, whither it had been conveyed by Sennacherib,
Merodach-baladan had settled there.[41] Sennacherib then turned his
Umman-menanu, the Elamite king, in 689, Sennacherib seized Babylon.
For the last eight years of Sennacherib's reign the country was given
In 681 Sennacherib was murdered by his sons, and, after a struggle for
party, whose support his grandfather, Sargon, had secured.[43] In 668
power for ever, after the manner Sennacherib had dealt with Babylon.
success; and they reached their climax in the reigns of Sennacherib
off the statues of Adad and Shala from Ekallâti, which Sennacherib
[Footnote 15: The "Synchronistic History" makes Adad-aplu-iddina the
attested by "Syn. Hist.," III., 9 ff., appears to be given as
record of the "Synchronistic History" ceases; and it is only with the
Sargon's death formed a period of interregnum, though the Kings' List
assigns the throne to Sennacherib. However this may be, we know that in
[Footnote 41: In spite of Sennacherib's devastation of Chaldea,
died. Sennacherib built ships on the Tigris and dragged them overland
Ashur-etil-ihini, Sin-shuni-lishir, and Sin-shar-ishkun will be treated
reward. Since Sennacherib's day the ranks of the army had been filled
Sennacherib's mighty walls kept the enemy at bay for three years, but
tradition that Sin-shar-ishkun, the Sarakos of the Greeks, perished in
to E-khulkhul, the temple of Sin in Harran, and its destruction by
Sin, after which the world was changed to its present state, both moral
cylinder-seals engraved with the figure of the Sun-god emerging from
One such belief has been preserved by Seneca,[27] who, giving Berossus
fifteen hundred years before the birth of Sargon I., who is supposed
Mithraie legends from Persia? Since the astral theory has no claim to
and 2 (Sonderabdruck, 16 pp.); see further, pp. 304, 308.]
[Footnote 15: It was not merely as booty, but in order to gain their favour, that Sin-idinnam
lunar and solar disks for the Moon-god and Sun-god; but this character was
eagle grasping lions; cf. "Sinner and Akkad," p. 100.]
by the mycologists, who argue that an Age of the Sun would naturally follow
names. Sin, the Moon-god, for example, was the god "Thirty," from the
